A couple years ago, maybe in freshman year, I sometimes liked to make art in Desmos, an online graphing calculator. One of my almost-finished pieces was a bicycle. I had written the equation for each line that made up the drawing of the bike, and I could even adjust the seat height and the pedal lengths with sliders. However, one feature of the bike was missing: the chain that would have connected the gears. The chains on a bicycle resemble two circles of different sizes with two outer tangent lines connecting them, so that’s what I needed to graph in order to complete the image. Some people would be content with simply eyeballing linear lines that stretched between the circles. But for me, that wouldn’t suffice. I wanted to figure out the precise definition of the tangent lines to the circles. After all, that kind of problem solving is where the fun is with Desmos art. However, at the time, I couldn’t manage to figure it out, and because of my pickiness, the bike sat unfinished. I have since lost the original file.
For my Extended Essay, I decided to return to this problem, armed with a few more years of mathematical knowledge. And, as you’ll see, this seemingly simple puzzle involved mathematics from a variety of domains, from algebra and geometry to calculus and trigonometry.
When we learn mathematics in school, we tend to learn it one subject at a time. This vast field is divided into classes, then units, then chapters, then problems. And while we may return to previous topics to refresh our memory, or solve problems that involve multiple techniques, it isn’t often that we get to experience the amazing overlap between different domains in math. The problem of defining tangent lines to circles really opened my eyes to this wonderful aspect of mathematics. Not only did I need to operate under multiple subjects within math, I also utilized many different, seemingly unrelated techniques specific to these subjects. For example, this one problem required methods ranging from trigonometric identities, to the quadratic formula, to u-substitution.
Here’s a diagram of two circles, their external tangents, and the line that connects the circles’ centers. As you can see, these three lines meet at point P. C_1 is the bigger circle, and C_2 is smaller. I’ve also labeled the radii of the circles with their endpoints being the points of tangency.
My goal was to define these external tangent lines in the coordinate plane in terms of the given values of the circles, specifically, the coordinates of the centers of the circles and the radii. This could be done using an equation or a system of equations.
Overall, my method involved defining the slopes of the tangent lines, and then combining them with the points of tangency on circle 1 to produce linear equations in point-slope form.
finding the slopes
If we knew the angles of the tangent lines, we could convert them into slopes by applying the tangent function. Luckily, the angles of the tangent lines are simply the angle of the line that connects the circles’ centers, plus or minus this angle difference here. So, what’s this angle difference?
The first step is to consider these two triangles: triangle C_1 P i_1 and triangle C_2 P i_3. C_1 P i_1 is a right triangle because a tangent line to a circle is perpendicular to a radius at that point of tangency. The same is true for the smaller triangle, and because these triangles also share the angle C_2 P i_3, they are similar. Therefore, we can write an equation that relates ratios of corresponding sides on these triangles. This equation says that the ratio between the radii of the circles, r_1 and r_2, equals the ratio between the hypotenuses of the triangles, h_1 and h_2. We can substitute h_1 with the sum of h_2 plus the distance between the centers of the circles, d. This distance can be easily found later by using the Pythagorean distance formula. Then, by rearranging the equation, we can solve for h_2.
Now, let’s zoom into the smaller triangle. This angle theta is the angle difference we’re looking to define. Because it’s a right triangle, we can use the definition of sine to relate theta to the lengths of two sides of the triangle: h_2 and r_2. Remember SOH-CAH-TOA? This is the “SOH” – sine equals opposite over hypotenuse. Then, by taking the arcsine of both sides, which is the inverse of the sine function, we’ve defined theta!
Let’s return to this equation mentioned earlier: the angles of the tangent lines equal the angle of the center line plus or minus the angle difference. We can substitute the angle difference that we just found, as well as the angle of the center line. The angle of the center line is just the arctangent of the slope of the center line, and the slope of the center line can be found using the slope formula with the coordinates of the centers of the circles. Next, we substitute for h_2, and simplify. Then, we substitute for d. Finally, we can apply the tangent function to the angles of the tangent lines to produce the slopes of the tangent lines.
So, this is it. This is a definition of the slopes of the tangent lines in terms of the given variables of the circles. And originally, I was content with this. I wasn’t really sure if I could simplify this any further, and I was going to move on to finding the points of tangency to complete the problem. However, I gave it a couple days rest. And, when I returned, that same spirit that made me want to find the exact tangent lines to make a drawing of a bike inspired me to continue with this process. I mean, come on, really? Nested trigonometric functions? There had to be a more elegant way to write this equation. And so, I continued.
This is an identity for the tangent of a sum or difference. It doesn’t look pretty, but it’s a start. For my equation, alpha is the arctangent term here, and beta is the arcsine term here. The tangent of alpha was easy to find: the tangent and arctangent functions cancel out. The tangent of beta, however, required another identity: the tangent of the arcsine of a value. So, we can substitute the value within this arcsine for x, and do some algebraic manipulation to find a simpler definition for the tangent of beta.
Now that we know the tangents of beta and alpha, we can substitute these into the identity for the tangent of a sum or difference. Then, we can rewrite the expression to include common denominators. Let’s just pause for a moment to marvel at the size of that expression. I mean, just look at that! I bet your Google Docs equation editor couldn’t render that. Anyway, it’s less complicated than it looks, because we can just factor out the common denominator to arrive at our final definition of the slopes of the tangent lines.
Some of you may be asking, “Roman, isn’t that just as inelegant as the expression you landed on originally?”. At first glance, it might look just as complicated. However, you may notice some repeated terms: x_1 - x_2, y_1 - y_2, and r_1 - r_2. If we assign the variables a, b, and c to these differences respectively, it becomes clear how much more elegant and symmetrical this equation really is. It’s pretty astonishing to me at least, that after all these algebraic manipulations and methods, the solution could turn out so simple.
Now that we know the slopes of the external tangent lines, we need to find points on those lines in order to create linear equations in point-slope form. Because the lines are tangent to circle 1, we know that the instantaneous slopes of the points of tangency are equal to the slopes of the lines, and so, we just need to ask the question “What points on circle 1 have the instantaneous slopes of the tangent lines?”. To answer this, of course, we need to find the derivative of the circle equation, which would tell us the slope of any given point on the circle.
This presents a problem, however. There are actually two points on a circle that have any given slope. In the context of this problem, that means that the answer to our question would include four points, instead of the only two real points of tangency. I had to settle for this ambiguous method because I couldn’t come up with a better solution.
The first step is to rewrite the circle equation in terms of y, because implicit differentiation wouldn’t work. Then, we can differentiate both sides with respect to x. To do this, we need to use the chain rule of differentiation. The equation we end up with tells us the slopes of the two points with any given x-value on a circle. What we’re trying to find, however, are the x-values of the points of tangency, given the slopes. As a result, we need to rewrite this equation to isolate x on one side. To make this process easier, I temporarily renamed each variable like so. After rearranging the equation, distributing the variables out, and moving all variables to one side, we can turn this equation into a quadratic. The quote-unquote “coefficients” of the quadratic are the terms in parentheses. We can factor these into the quadratic formula in order to solve for c, which is the name we gave to x in the original equation. We can simplify the radicand separately down to just two terms. Then, we can substitute the radicand back into the quadratic formula and continue simplifying. Finally, we can replace the temporary variable names to arrive at the final definition of the x-values of the points of tangency.
By plugging in the x-values of the points of tangency into the circle equation, we can find the y-values of the points of tangency. And now that we have the coordinates of the points of tangency and the slopes of the external tangents, we can use the point-slope linear equation form to create the final system of equations for external tangent lines of two circles. Again, it’s important to note that this system of equations is ambiguous. It generates four possible lines, and unfortunately, if one wanted to use this model, they would need to choose the correct two external tangent lines manually.
Now that I created a system of equations for external tangents to circles, I wanted to extend the problem to internal tangents. The process of creating a model for internal tangents was very similar to the one for external tangents. Again, there are two triangles, formed by one tangent line, the line that connects the circles’ centers, and the radii of the circles. These triangles are similar because these vertical angles are congruent and both of the radii are perpendicular to the tangent line. Like before, we can write an equation relating ratios of corresponding sides on the triangles, and rewrite the equation to solve for h_1. Then, we can use the definition of sine on the bigger right triangle to write an equation involving this angle difference here, called theta. Finally, we can substitute for h_1 and solve for theta.
Theta is the difference between the angle of the center line and the angle of the tangent line. We can use the same equation that we used for the angles of the external tangent lines and substitute our new value for the angle difference. Then, we can take the tangent of these angles to find the slopes of the internal tangent lines.
Notice that the equation for the slopes of the internal tangent lines is almost exactly the same as the equation for the slopes of the external tangent lines. The only difference is that it uses the sum of the radii of the circles instead of the difference. In fact, during the entire process of finding the model for the external tangent lines, this term of the difference between the radii is never separated or modified, and as a result, we can adapt the final system of equations for internal tangent lines by replacing this term with the sum of the radii. Or, we can simply use the plus-or-minus operator to make a system of equations that includes both types of tangents.
So, this is the final system of equations for internal and external tangents to circles in my Extended Essay. It generates eight lines, but only four of them are valid because of ambiguity to do with slopes on circle 1.